add runbook for HighOverallControlPlaneMemory (#246)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/machine-config-operator/HighOverallControlPlaneMemory.md

# HighOverallControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning

This alert becomes pending when the total memory
is use across all control plane nodes is detected

> to be using more then 60% of total available memory.

Author: Fixed.

> If the control plane nodes continues to use memory above the

Author: Fixed.

> This alert becomes pending when the total memory
> is use across all control plane nodes are detected
> to be using more then 60% of total available memory.
> If the control plane nodes continue to use memory above the
> threshold for 1 hour, the alert will fire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert becomes pending when the total memory
in use across all control plane nodes is detected
to be using more then 60% of total available memory.
If the control plane nodes continue to use memory above the
threshold for 1 hour, the alert will fire.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Impact
The memory usage per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected

> which negatively influences the pod scheduling. ETCD also relies

Author: Fixed.

> ## Impact
> The memory usage per instance within control
> plane nodes influences the stability
> and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
> Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
> which negatively influences the pod scheduling. Etcd also relies
> on a certain number of nodes being in quorum in order to operate.
> If multiple control plane nodes become unstable,
> quorum can be lost and the cluster can cease to operate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Impact
The memory usage per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected,
which negatively influences the pod scheduling. Etcd also relies
on a certain number of nodes being in quorum in order to operate.
If multiple control plane nodes become unstable,
quorum can be lost and the cluster can cease to operate.
```

Reviewer: > OOM kill is expected

When/why is OOM kill expected?

Author: Changed the wording so OOM may occur instead of using expected.

## Diagnosis

This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query.

> Targeting any node with the role of master,
> prometheus sums the free memory left
> of all nodes, the buffer memory of all nodes,
> and the cached memory of all nodes. This is
> divided by the total amount of memory available on all nodes.

Reviewer: I'm personally not a fan of using "sum" as a verb. 
```suggestion
Targeting any node with the role of master,
Prometheus computes the free memory left
of all nodes, the buffer memory of all nodes,
and the cached memory of all nodes. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on all nodes.
```

Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value by 100
and this value is the total percentage

> of memory used by the control plane node. If this value

Author: Fixed.

> is larger than a certain percentage for a certain period

Reviewer: > certain percentage for a certain period

Earlier, you suggested these thresholds are 60% for 1 hour. 
Is that true here? 
Are these values configurable? 
Either way, "certain" is probably not the best word.

Author: Fixed.

of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.

To diagnose why a control plane node is using a high
amount of memory, you can investigate the following:

> - The `oc describe` command will retrieve a large
> variety of data on nodes, such as pods
> scheduled on the node and its current
> memory/cpu requests. It will also list the total
> allocated resources on the node and
> how much it is currently using. You can run
> a script to get a list of all control plane
> nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
> statistics.

Reviewer: Too many "it" instances can be confusing, as to what it is. Such as [line 46](https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/pull/246/files#diff-53cba0fe0aafafbbf4ad714e5427504fe5eab032d90b31999acf942e968945c6R46). I'm not sure what "it" is. 

```suggestion
- The `oc describe` command will retrieve a large
variety of data on nodes, such as pods
scheduled on the node and the current
memory/cpu requests of those pods. The command will also list the total
allocated resources on the node and
how much it is currently using. You can run
the following script to get a list of all control plane
nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
statistics.
```
I might change _a script_ to _the following script_ to make sure folks see the script below. My first reaction as I was reading was: "What script?? ...Oh, that one?" If I were a panicked user dealing with memory problems, my reaction might have been a bit stronger.

Author: Fixed.

  ```console
  $ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
  ```
- For kubelet-level commands, you can get
the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune the command to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

- For troubleshooting individual nodes,
you can SSH or `oc debug` into the control
plane node and use commands such as `top`
to diagnose memory usage.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```
- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

> - Another reason that the memory could
> be high on the control plane is because of
> `etcd`. Acting as the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is
> constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
> match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
> plane node. Because of the amount of data
> and querying etcd keeps track of,
> this can lead to high memory usage.
> To ensure etcd is running smoothly,
> you can check the response time of etcd and
> health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
>   ```console
>   $ oc -n openshift-etcd rsh <etcd-pod-name>
>   # etcdctl member list -w table
>   # etcdctl endpoint health -w table
>   # etcdctl endpoint status -w table
>   ```

Reviewer: Thinking that leading with the problem might be a better approach. 
```suggestion
- The memory use of etcd could be 
another reason that the memory could
be high on the control plane. Acting as the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is
constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
plane node. The amount of data
and querying etcd keeps track of can lead to high memory usage.
To ensure etcd is running smoothly,
you can check the response time of etcd and
health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
  ```console
  $ oc -n openshift-etcd rsh <etcd-pod-name>
  # etcdctl member list -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint health -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint status -w table
  ```
```

Author: Fixed.

>   You can also get the amount of objects that etcd is storing via this command.

Reviewer: This is a nit-pick. But _via_ means _by way of_ or _by means of_.  
```suggestion
  You can also get the amount of objects that etcd is storing by using this command.
```

Author: Fixed.

  ```console
  $ oc exec -n openshift-etcd <etcd-pod> -c etcd -n openshift-etcd -- etcdctl --command-timeout=160s get / --prefix --keys-only |sed '/^$/d' | cut -d/ -f3,4 | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn |head
  ```
  You can also use the [fio tool](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices)
  to check the disk performance for the storage disks backing etcd.

## Mitigation
- Ensure your control plane nodes
are appropriately sized for your environment. Red Hat
offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can

> increase a control plane nodes memory size

Author: Fixed.

> - In the event this alert is firing
> and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
> increase a control plane nodes' memory size
> to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
> can troubleshoot the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
increase a control plane node's memory size
to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
can troubleshoot the issue.
```

Author: Fixed.

> - Because etcd is crucial to how the cluster runs, Red Hat
> has [documented](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#recommended-etcd-practices_recommended-etcd-practices)
> the recommended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance.

Reviewer: I might use this as link text instead to be more clear. 
```suggestion
- Because etcd is crucial to how the cluster runs, Red Hat
has documented the [recommended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#recommended-etcd-practices_recommended-etcd-practices)
.
```

# HighOverallControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning

This alert becomes pending when the total memory
in use across all control plane nodes is detected
to be using more then 60% of total available memory.
If the control plane nodes continue to use memory above the

> threshold for 1 hour, the alert will fire.

Author: Fixed.

> ## Impact
> The memory usage per instance within control
> plane nodes influences the stability
> and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
> Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill can occur,
> which negatively influences the pod scheduling. Etcd also relies
> on a certain number of nodes being in quorum in order to operate.
> If multiple control plane nodes become unstable,
> quorum can be lost and the cluster can cease to operate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Impact
The memory usage per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most noticably in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill can occur,
which negatively influences the pod scheduling. Etcd also relies
on a certain number of nodes being in quorum in order to operate.
If multiple control plane nodes become unstable,
quorum can be lost and the cluster can cease to operate.
```

Reviewer: This is probably not necessary, as our audience will likely know. But, we might want to add something to clarify that "memory usage"  is not necessarily the problem. 
```suggestion
## Impact
The memory usage per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill can occur with excessive memory usage,
which negatively influences the pod scheduling. Etcd also relies
on a certain number of nodes being in quorum in order to operate.
If multiple control plane nodes become unstable,
quorum can be lost and the cluster can cease to operate.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Diagnosis

This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query.

> Targeting any node with the role of master,
> prometheus computes the free memory left
> of all nodes, the buffer memory of all nodes,
> and the cached memory of all nodes. This is
> divided by the total amount of memory available on all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Targeting any node with the role of master,
prometheus computes the free memory left
on all nodes, the buffer memory on all nodes,
and the cached memory on all nodes. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on all nodes.
```

Author: fixed.

> Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value by 100
> and this value is the total percentage
> of memory used by the control plane nodes. If this value
> is larger than the alert defined percentage for a certain period
> of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value by 100
and this value is the total percentage
of memory used by the control plane nodes. If this value
is larger than the alert-defined percentage for a certain period
of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.
```
Should we just go with the hard percent?

```suggestion
Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value by 100
and this value is the total percentage
of memory used by the control plane nodes. If this value
is larger than 60% for a certain period
of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.
```

Author: % is fine. Fixed.

allocated resources on the node and
how much it is currently using. You can run
the following script to get a list of all control plane
nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
statistics.

  ```console
  $ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
  ```
- For kubelet-level commands, you can get
the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune the command to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

- For troubleshooting individual nodes,
you can SSH or `oc debug` into the control
plane node and use commands such as `top`
to diagnose memory usage.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```
- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

> - The memory use of `etcd` could be another
> reason that memory could be acting high on
> the control plane. Acting as the primary datastore
> for the cluster state, etcd is
> constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
> match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
> plane node. Because of the amount of data
> and querying etcd keeps track of,
> this can lead to high memory usage.
> To ensure etcd is running smoothly,
> you can check the response time of etcd and
> health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The memory use of `etcd` could be another
reason that memory could be high on
the control plane. Acting as the primary datastore
for the cluster state, etcd is
constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
plane node. Because of the amount of data
and querying etcd keeps track of,
this can lead to high memory usage.
To ensure etcd is running smoothly,
you can check the response time of etcd and
health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
```

Author: Fixed.
